Data Pack Programming Pt. 3 (#415)
unicorn-utterances/unicorn-utterances: content/blog/minecraft-data-packs-scoreboards/index.md

	published: '2022-08-12T23:20:03.284Z',
	authors: ['fennifith'],
	tags: [],
	attached: [],
	license: 'cc-by-nc-sa-4',
	series: "Minecraft Data Pack Programming",
	order: 3
}
---

> Please note: this guide specifically covers the **Java Edition** version of Minecraft. Bedrock Edition does not use data packs, but provides customization through [add-ons](https://minecraft.fandom.com/wiki/Add-on).

The data packs built in this series can be found in the [unicorn-utterances/mc-datapacks-tutorial](https://github.com/unicorn-utterances/mc-datapacks-tutorial/tree/main/3-scoreboards) repository. Feel free to use it for reference as you read through these articles!

# Storing scores

In many data packs, you might find a need to store information that can't be directly accessed through an entity or another command. A common way to do this is through the use of *scoreboards,* which can store a table of numbers for each entity or player. These can be used to reference player statistics, such as the number of blocks mined, or keep track of arbitrary values in your code.

## Creating a scoreboard

> We can use the subcommands of `/scoreboard objectives` to create and modify any scoreboards that we use. Let's try making a scoreboard to track the number of animals that each player has spawned through our data pack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can use the subcommands of `/scoreboard objectives` to create and modify scoreboards.. Let's try making a scoreboard to track the number of animals that each player has spawned through our data pack.
```

```shell
scoreboard objectives add fennifith.animals_spawned dummy
```

This creates an objective named `fennifith.animals_spawned` that is connected to the `dummy` game statistic. We'll talk about what that means later on, but this effectively means the scoreboard will only be modified if you set its values yourself.

## Scoreboard conventions

### Namespaced objective names

> Players often want to have multiple data packs installed in their world at once. Since all scoreboards operate globally in the world, we need to make sure that our scoreboard names will not conflict with any scoreboards used by other data packs.

Reviewer: Needs more clarification on what conflicts with what / Perhaps a more explicit example of two datapacks with names and all?

To accomplish this, it is common to "namespace" your scoreboard names within your data pack by adding a certain prefix. Here, I've started my scoreboard names with `fennifith.animals` to indicate that they belong to my data pack.

### Creating / removing Scoreboards

> Typically, all data packs will create any scoreboards they need in a `load.mcfunction` function, connected to the `#minecraft:load` function tag.

Reviewer: It would sound a lot better and more engaging if it were addressing the reader directly "Typically, you would create any scoreboards..."

Some data packs additionally create an `uninstall.mcfunction` file, not connected to any function tag, that can be executed to remove all of the data pack's scoreboard objectives. This is useful for when a player wants to remove your data pack from their world without leaving any of its behavior behind.

## Setting values

> We can set values of a scoreboard using the `/scoreboard players` subcommands. Most of these subcommands accept two arguments for the `<targets>` and `<objective>` of the score to change. For example, the following command will set our entry in the `fennifith.animals_spawned` table to `1`.

Reviewer: More consistent naming needed (`<target>` in "Setting values" and `<selector>` in "/tellraw" later in the article, are referring to the same thing)

```shell
#                     set our scoreboard entry
#                     |   use the entry of the current player
#                     |   |                    use "1" as the value to add
#                     |   |                    |

> scoreboard objectives set @s fennifith.animals_spawned 1

Reviewer: **Suggestion:** Pointing out that `@s` in this scenario is "fennifith" to avoid confusing the latter as part of the objective
And pointing out the target and the objective in the command to make things clearer

> scoreboard objectives set @s fennifith.animals_spawned 1

Reviewer: Double check all code snippets for errors between using `scoreboard players` and `scoreboard objectives`
Speaking of which, the difference needs to be explained between the two -because `scoreboard objectives add` is used later in "Tracking statistics"- as it may not be evident

```

<div style="margin-top: -2em;">

| Target    | Value |
| --------- | ----- |
| fennifith | 1     |

</div>

If we want to add to this value, we can use the `scoreboard objectives add` subcommand instead. Likewise, `scoreboard objectives remove` will subtract a value from our scoreboard.

```shell
#                     add a number to the current scoreboard value
#                     |   use the entry of the current player
#                     |   |                    use "2" as the number to add
#                     |   |                    |
scoreboard objectives add @s fennifith.animals_spawned 2
```
<div style="margin-top: -2em;">

| Target    | Value |
| --------- | ----- |
| fennifith | 3     |

</div>

### Using global entries

> While these entries allow us to store player-specific numbers, we might also want a value that affects our entire data pack. For example, we might want to track the total number of animals spawned in our world in addition to the number of animals for each player.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In certain cases, we want to store values that aren't player specific, but instead affect our entire datapack. For example, we might want to track the total number of animals spawned in our world in addition to the number of animals for each player.
```

scoreboard objectives set $global fennifith.animals_spawned 4
```

<div style="margin-top: -2em;">

| Target    | Value |
| --------- | ----- |
| fennifith | 3     |
| $global   | 4     |

</div>

If we didn't include the `$` before our variable name in this snippet, our code would still work! However, what would happen if a player registered the username `global` and tried to use our data pack?

Since the `$` is an invalid username character, we can safely use it for global values without that possibility.

### Using the "/execute store" subcommand

Each Minecraft command provides a "success" and a "result" value which specify if the command was successful - and if so, what value it returned.

The `execute store` subcommand can be used to designate a place to store these values, such as a scoreboard entry.

For example, this command will copy the value of our `$global` variable into `$global_2`...

```shell
#       store the result of the command
#       |                  place it in "$global_2"
#       |                  |                                       run a command that returns the value of "$global"
#       |                  |                                       |

> execute store result score $global_2 fennifith.animals_spawned run scoreboard players get $global fennifith.animals_spawned

Reviewer: Storing values needs to be better represented, to show that an entry can have multiple values for multiple objectives

## Detecting events with statistics

We can use this behavior in our `tick.mcfunction` (which runs on every game tick) to detect when a player has used the carrot on a stick. We'll first set the value for all players to 0, then check the scoreboard on every tick to see if it has increased. If it has, we know that the item has been used, and can reset it to 0 to detect it again.

In the previous article, you may have noticed the `/execute if score` subcommand for checking scoreboards in a condition. We can use this along with a *number range* to conditionally execute our function if the scoreboard has a value >= 1.

1. We first need to create our scoreboard when our data pack is loaded by the game - so we'll place the following line in our `load.mcfunction`:
	```shell
	# data/fennifith/functions/animals/load.mcfunction

	# create a new scoreboard tracking the "carrot_on_a_stick" statistic
	scoreboard objectives add fennifith.animals_carrot_stick minecraft.used:minecraft.carrot_on_a_stick
	```

> 2. Then, we can place a command in `tick.mcfunction` to run our `fennifith:animals/spawn` function if the scoreboard has a value >= 1.

Reviewer: It may need to be clarified that "fennifith:animals/spawn" is an example function that spawns animals as "fennifith.animals_spawned" has been used many times throughout the article and could cause some confusion
